+++
title = "Models"
description = ""
date = 2021-05-01T18:10:00+00:00
updated = 2021-05-01T18:10:00+00:00
draft = false
weight = 11
sort_by = "weight"
template = "docs/page.html"

[extra]
lead = ""
toc = true
top = false
+++

Models in `loco` mean entity classes that allow for easy database querying and writes, but also migrations and seeding.

## Fat models, slim controllers

`loco` models **are designed after active record**. This means they're a central point in your universe, and every logic or operation your app has should be there.

It means that `User::create` creates a user **but also** `user.buy(product)` will buy a product.

If you agree with that direction you'll get these for free:

- **Time-effective testing**, because testing your model tests most if not all of your logic and moving parts.
- Ability to run complete app workflows **from _tasks_, or from workers and other places**.
- Effectively **compose features** and use cases by combining models, and nothing else.
- Essentially, **models become your app** and controllers are just one way to expose your app to the world.

We use [`SeaORM`](https://www.sea-ql.org/SeaORM/) as the main ORM behind our ActiveRecord abstraction.

- _Why not Diesel?_ - although Diesel has better performance, its macros, and general approach felt incompatible with what we were trying to do
- _Why not sqlx_ - SeaORM uses sqlx under the hood, so the plumbing is there for you to use `sqlx` raw if you wish.

## Example model

The life of a `loco` model starts with a _migration_, then an _entity_ Rust code is generated for you automatically from the database structure:

```
src/
  models/
    _entities/   <--- autogenerated code
      users.rs   <--- the bare entity and helper traits
    users.rs  <--- your custom activerecord code
```

Using the `users` activerecord would be just as you use it under SeaORM [see examples here](https://www.sea-ql.org/SeaORM/docs/next/basic-crud/select/)

Adding functionality to the `users` activerecord is by _extension_:

```rust
impl super::_entities::users::ActiveModel {
    /// .
    ///
    /// # Errors
    ///
    /// .
    pub fn validate(&self) -> Result<(), DbErr> {
        let validator: ModelValidator = self.into();
        validator.validate().map_err(validation::into_db_error)
    }
}
```

## Migrations

To add a new model _you have to use a migration_.

```
$ loco generate model posts title:string! content:text user:references
```

For schema data types, you can use the following mapping to understand the schema:

```rust
("text", "text"),
("string", "string_null"),
("string!", "string"),
("string^", "string_uniq"),
("int", "integer_null"),
("int!", "integer"),
("int^", "integer_uniq"),
("bool", "bool_null"),
("bool!", "bool"),
("ts", "timestamp_null"),
("ts!", "timestamp"),
("uuid", "uuid"),
```


Using `user:references` uses the special `references` type, which will create a relationship between a `post` and a `user`, adding a `user_id` reference field to the `posts` table.

You can generate an empty model:

```
$ loco generate model posts
```

Or a data model, without any references:

```
$ loco generate model posts title:string! content:text
```

This creates a migration in the root of your project in `migration/`.
You can now apply it:

```
$ loco db migrate
```

And generate back entities (Rust code) from it:

```
$ loco db entities
```

## Configuration

Model configuration that's available to you is exciting because it controls all aspects of development, testing, and production, with a ton of goodies, coming from production experience.

```yaml
# .. other sections ..

database:
  uri: postgres://localhost:5432/rr_app
  # uri: sqlite://db.sqlite?mode=rwc
  enable_logging: false
  min_connections: 1
  max_connections: 1
  auto_migrate: true
  dangerously_truncate: true
  dangerously_recreate: true
```

By combining these flags, you can create different expriences to help you be more productive.

You can truncate before an app starts -- which is useful for running tests, or you can recreate the entire DB when the app starts -- which is useful for integration tests or setting up a new environment. In production, you want these turned off (hence the "dangerously" part).

## Testing

If you used the generator to crate a model migration, you should also have an auto generated model test in `tests/models/posts.rs` (remember we generated a model named `post`?)

A typical test contains everything you need to set up test data, boot the app, and reset the database automatically before the testing code runs. It looks like this:

```rust
async fn can_find_by_pid() {
    configure_insta!();

    let boot = testing::boot_test::<App, Migrator>().await;
    testing::seed::<App>(&boot.app_context.db).await.unwrap();

    let existing_user =
        Model::find_by_pid(&boot.app_context.db, "11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111").await;
    let non_existing_user_results =
        Model::find_by_email(&boot.app_context.db, "23232323-2323-2323-2323-232323232323").await;

    assert_debug_snapshot!(existing_user);
    assert_debug_snapshot!(non_existing_user_results);
}
```
